Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes. And today
I'm talking with dr. Christus
. She is the research
manager of the quantum architectures
and computation group at Microsoft.
How are you? I'm great.
Thanks for having me on
the show. Oh, thanks for
coming on the show. It's
overwhelming to even think about
something like quantum computing and
I appreciate you being available
and being so flexible in
talking about this. I've actually
been watching all of your
videos and YouTube and reading
articles and trying to get
my head around this because
the word quantum is one
of those words that I
think we, the, the lay
people attach a lot of
mysterious and mystical things too.
So I wanted to talk
about it in a very
concrete way. Is there a
quantum computer yet? Well, that's
a, that's a great question.
Yes, quantum computers exist today
actually, and really they've been
around in a very small,
early form for several years
now. And really our goal
now is to see a
quantum computer scale up, right?
So we have these preliminary
quantum computers. They can't do
anything more powerful than your
classical computers, but as we
scale them up, you know,
the promise is that on
certain problems, they're going to
far outperform what we can
do with your, you know,
your typical processing, your, your
conventional computing, the conventional computing
you have today. So some
problems that you would want
to run and, and solve
using conventional computers, even if
that's say a supercomputer, some
problems will actually take billions
and billions of years to
find a solution. And these,
you know, some of these
problems with a quantum computer,
a scaled up quantum computer,
you'll actually be able to
solve them in a matter
of hours, hours, or days.
So that's a pretty substantial
impact. Does that mean that
it is a and again,
all my questions are going
to be ignorant. So just
assume I'm saying, forgive my
ignorance in front of everything
that I say, is that
because the quantum computer is
faster or is it because
it's taking shortcuts? Yeah. Yeah.
It's a very nuanced change
here. So when we save
faster, you know, the clock
rate of the quantum computer
actually isn't necessarily faster than
your conventional computer clock rate,
right? You're looking at something
that might be maybe a
hundred nanoseconds, 1,000 nanoseconds up
to a microsecond for a
clock rate. That's not faster
than conventional clock rates. But
the key is that when
you look at the algorithms,
right, the applications that you're
going to run on a
quantum computer, the number of
operations in those algorithms or
in those applications is so,
so much, fewer, so much
less than the number of
operations you would need to
do on your conventional computer.
That indeed that the ultimate
runtime to find the solution
is much, much faster. Interesting.
Okay. That makes me feel
like maybe a quantum computer,
isn't a generalized thing. It's
more like a GPU or
a coprocessor for math. Yeah,
exactly. We like to, we
like to think about quantum
computers really as an accelerator,
right? So imagine Azure, right.
I, I work at Microsoft,
so we have Microsoft Azure.
We have this amazing cloud
computing platform. And what do
we bring to the cloud?
We bring to the cloud,
many different types of processing
and compute options, whether that's
GPU, FPGA CPU, right. And
another one of those options
is going to be your
quantum chip, your quantum computer,
your quantum accelerator. And so
indeed you're not going to
run every, you know, every
problem you want to solve
on a quantum computer, you're
really gonna target it for
a special class of problems
or for a sub-routine within
your algorithm. You're going to,
you know, design algorithms in
a hybrid way. You might
use your GPU for some
data processing and then send
that data after that, to
your quantum chip. Right? So
you can really operate in
this hybrid, you know, this
hybrid compute environment. Hmm. It
seems to me like the,
the industry and the, you
know, the wired magazines are
kind of going nuts because
it's just so fun to
say quantum, you know, it's
just one of those mystical
words and there's, they're making
big statements around how this
is going to change everything.
And because, you know, so
many of us have been
in tech for so long.
It feels like every 20
minutes, there's something that's going
to change everything, whether it
be AI or ML, or
is it going to change
everything, or do you think
the hype machine maybe is
going too far? I think
it's going to change quite
a lot. Everything might be
a little extreme, but I
think we will see revolutionary
level changes coming from being
able to actually quantum compute
the types of problems we're
looking at solving with a
quantum computer are, you know,
I, I believe world world
changing, right? We're looking at
solving things that really give
us more knowledge, you know,
about how to better more
efficiently produce food or, you
know, combat things like global
warming. You know, these are
no small scale problems. We're
looking at problems that were,
you know, the human race
needs to face and solve.
Quantum computers can help us
find solutions to this level
of problem. Of course, we'll
do it in conjunction with
our conventional computing and supercomputers
and everything else. It will
be a hybrid style solution,
but quantum computers will be
a key, absolute critical piece
to finding solutions for these,
this scale of problem. There
was a time when I
would buy a, a three
86 SX that didn't have
a coprocessor and Excel would
use it or not use
it depending on whether it
was there. And there was
a time when I could
buy a voodoo graphics card
and get better graphics or
not. Will there be a
time that I'll be able
to go and buy a
card and pop it into
my machine and it'll have
a quantum coprocessor? Or do
you think this is something
that's going to be relegated
to giant refrigerators in the
cloud? Yeah, I think more
and more, we're moving to
more of a cloud based
model across compute more generally,
right? Because you're going to
have your data stored in
the cloud. You have apps
and services in the cloud,
and then, you know, you
need not buy the chip
or the card to put
into your local PC. You
can access an amazing set
of resources in the cloud.
So I think ultimately we're
seeing a move to, you
know, broader and broader cloud
compute. And in that environment,
of course, we'll sit these
quantum chips that you will
have access to. It is
also the case that a
quantum computer, at least most
of the paths to realizing
a quantum computer, including the
path we're taking at Microsoft,
indeed the quantum computer is
operating in a very low
temperature environment, a millikelvin temperatures.
And that means we need
a, what's called a dilution
refrigerator around it. So popping
a dilution refrigerator into your
local PC, it probably isn't
going to happen. And that's
another reason. Yeah, exactly. But
you know, definitely having access
to those devices in the
cloud that will make it
accessible for everyone. Interesting. Now
you have a, a PhD,
but you also worked in
machine learning and, and things
like that are quantum computers
and machine learning intermingled, or
is that just your career
path? Well, yeah, it's pretty
remarkable. You know, I did
a PhD, quantum computing, and
then when I joined Microsoft,
I, I studied and did
research and machine learning for
web ranking for, for several
years. And at that time
that was over a decade
ago. I didn't yet see
the crossing between the two,
the two opportunities that I
had taken with quantum computing
and machine learning. And now
it's, it's such, we're, we're
really looking at quantum machine
learning. So it was pretty,
pretty, it was great happenstance
that I studied both of
these subjects. And now we're
really diving into what will
quantum computing bring and lend
to machine learning and AI,
what kind of, you know,
what does quantum mechanics bring
to machine learning? How can
we take cues from modeling
and computing? You know, the
type of modeling and computing
nature does, how do we
take those cues and build
better models of vision, speech,
you know, language, text data,
right? Can you take something
that fundamentally has some quantum
mechanical elements to it say
a quantum model, can that
quantum model better represent data
or bring new insights? It's
absolutely fascinating that now with
a quantum computer, you have,
you really have a better
glimpse into how nature computes.
And with that, it, it's
fun to think about the
promise that that brings for
machine learning. So, so indeed
now quantum machine learning is,
is an area that we're
definitely investigating quite a lot.
And we see improvements coming
from quantum models of data.
We see speed ups ways
to better train deep neural
nets. You can get faster
training of models, you can
get better approximations of data
and so forth. So you
said something really powerful in
the middle there where you
said, how nature itself computes.
I've heard a number of
people in pliers and not
more than just implies, say
that nature is a big
computer and this isn't necessarily
the Elon Musk, we're all
in the matrix theory. But
the idea that in order
for nature to simply be,
it has to calculate. And
it seems like quantum computing
is, is trying to take
some of that spare CPU
for lack of a better
word and do something with
it. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah,
you can think of nature
as a, is a big
computer, right? It's it's clock
rig is much, much faster
than the quantum computer, but
indeed, you know, with a
quantum computer, what you're able
to do is really simulate
physical systems, right? At the
core, what are we doing?
We're evolving, what's called Schrodinger's
equation, right? Which, which tells
us how state evolves, how
these quantum mechanical States evolve
over time. And by being
able to actually model that
and compute, make it digital,
even make it able to
be error corrected. You know,
we're, we're basically getting a
step closer to being able
to take a computational, you
know, hammer to some of
the problems that nature is
solving every day. Things like
we think about quantum chemistry
or materials, you know, nature,
you go outside, you see,
you know, things are growing,
right. Trees are growing leaves.
You know, you have grass
and flowers and all of
these things are growing. Right.
And nature's just doing that.
Now, if we can understand
better how we produce, you
know, how does nature produce
fertilizer? How do they perform?
What's called nitrogen fixation so
efficiently. We, we don't perform
a nitrogen fixation in the
lab near as efficiently as
nature does it with microbes
in the ground. But now
with a quantum computer, we
can begin to actually study
these microbes, understand how do
these organisms actually produce fertilizers
so efficiently, and then try
to model that, mimic it,
engineer it, and then come
up with a much better
procedure, just that alone, studying
what we called nitrogen fixation,
the process that we use
to produce artificial fertilizer with
that, we, we actually could
end up saving something like
3% of the world's natural
gas today. We use something
like 3% of the world's
natural gas just to produce
artificial fertilizer in labs. So
if we can make that
more efficient, that could be
huge. So that's an example
of modeling nature, right? With
a quantum computer, Right. And
looking at like the idealist
view of the nitrogen cycle
and doing the right thing
to make it go effectively,
as opposed to artificially manufacturing
fertilizer and plugging it into
that cycle. Yeah. See if
we can engineer an artificial
system, actually, a catalyst that
really mimics what nature does
in that process. You mentioned
shorting her. And as most
laymen myself included know about
the Schrodinger's cat concept, where
you put the cat in
the box, the cat is
either alive or dead. And
the theory is that there's
a, a quantum superposition where
the, for a time the
cat is both alive and
dead. Is that something that's
just come into popular culture
or does that, that theory
or that concept really model
a real problem that the
quantum computing tries to solve?
Right? Well, yes, the cat
of course is a very
macroscopic object, but indeed the
idea behind Schrodinger's cat, right?
The idea that you have
this black box, right? You
have this box and if
you don't open the box
right inside the box, the
cat is both alive and
dead. But when you open
the box, the cat is
either alive or dead. The
whole idea of this is
it's really what's happening at
the information level in your
quantum computer. So inside your
conventional computer, your classical computer,
as a, as we, we
call it sometimes our bits,
right? Binary units of information,
that can be zero or
one, right? Your, your conventional
computer is like, it has
switches they're on or off.
Now a quantum computer inside
has cubits quantum bits. And
these quantum bits can take
on just as you just
said, what's called a superposition
of States, this alive and
dead notion. The superposition of
States, what it means is
a cubit can be both
zero and one simultaneously when
it's operating inside the quantum
computer. Now the catch is
when I look at my
cubit. So I measure my
cubit from the outside world,
from our macroscopic world. I
want to get information out
of my, you know, out
of my quantum computer, I
measure the state, it becomes
zero or one. And it
becomes that with a probability
associated to what's called the
amplitude of the state, which
it goes into more detail
than we probably want to
get into on the podcast.
But the whole idea of
being it really is inside
the quantum computer. It's like
having all of these cats,
all of these Schrodinger cats
operating together. And then at
the end of the computation,
we measure the system and
we get out of state.
So if I had eight
cats or eight bits, all
in a row, are they
alternating between all possible States
and all potential eight, you
know, 256 or whatever eight
bits is worth of, of
States. And then at the
end, by observing them, I
forced the, I force its
hand. I forced the universe
is hand, and then it
gives me a value, right?
So If you remove the
word alternating, so it's not
that it's oscillating or, or
kind of doing a path,
then another path and another
path, it's actually doing it
in parallel. So inside the
quantum computer, you have eight,
let's say eight cubits, those
eight cubits, as you just
said, you have two to
the eight actual States, then
256 States and your quantum
computer is simultaneously operating across
all of those 256 States.
Hm. So all of the
answers are existing at the
same time until we forced
it. And again, I apologize
for using these terms that
I'm sure are incorrect, but
until we force its hand
or we observe it. And
then the, the, it is
the observation that causes the
universe to make the decision.
Exactly. So as soon as
we measure, so to observe
it, we measure the, and
when we measure it, we're,
we're saying, give me back
out a class, you know,
one of these States, one
of the 256 States, and
it'll come back to me
in a bit string, right.
So I get that bit
string back, but I get
only one of the 250,
60 it's back when I
measure the system. So how
do you know it's the
right one, if you can,
all of my knowledge of
this, isn't entirely, entirely based
on watching black mirror. So
maybe I'm not prepared to
interview you, but does not
that mean that there are,
I have no way of
knowing if the answer I
got back is the right
one, because there could be
255 other doctors for his,
that are out there enjoying
their answer, which is different.
Right? So at the surface,
it seems that way. Right.
But what's pretty remarkable is
that you can design this
algorithm. It's like, you know,
when you create a, a
recipe to bake a cake,
right, you could say, I'm
going to throw all these
ingredients together. And I don't
know if it's going to
come out chocolate or vanilla
or, you know, but, well,
we don't really do that.
Right. We design the recipes
so that we make a
chocolate cake, right? The output
ultimately needs to be the
chocolate cake and not the
vanilla cake here. Same thing.
You know, we are going
to design the algorithm, just
like we design classical algorithms,
just like we design algorithms
for our conventional computers. We
have an idea of exactly
what output we want. And
so we set up the
sequence of operations to optimize
for getting that output out.
And we can do that
in the quantum computer as
well. And what this comes
to is an idea of
what's called interference, quantum interference.
What we're really doing is
if you think of these
States, right? In the example,
you gave 256 States, right?
Imagine them each is a
wave in a tide pool.
And when waves collide, they
grow, right. The amplitude increases,
some waves will grow and
some waves actually will cancel
out and disappear. Right. And
so just imagine, you know,
touching your finger to a
tide pool and then touching
your finger again and watching
these waves collide with some
growing, some collapsing. That's what
we actually program is to
get some of these waves
to increase in amplitude in
the height of the wave
and some of them to
disappear. Now, if you imagine
each of these waves is
one of these States, that
means I can get some
of them to disappear out
of the computation and some
of them to really amplify.
And as I amplify them,
when I measure the system,
the most amplified wave has
the highest probability of being
the state that I measure
at the end. So if
I can get my solution
to be in that high
amplitude wave, I'm, I'm pretty,
you know, I'm pretty golden
in terms of getting the
solution out that I need.
And every quantum algorithm then
is a probabilistic algorithm. So
if I didn't get the
answer wanted, or, you know,
I want to check, I'm
going to run the algorithm
just a couple of times,
because with high probability, I'm
going to get the state
out that I want because
I've sculpted the solution, the
algorithm in a way that
this high amplitude wave has
the, has the right answer
in it. That's interesting when
I, that makes me think
about in the context of
the many worlds theory that,
how do you know that
with a universe that we're
in is the real one
it's because it's the most
likely one because we're in
it. If we weren't in
it, it wouldn't be the
most likely one. Yeah, there
you go. Now, when someone
says a cubit, I've heard
people say that cubits are
our two States, like you
said, where the, you can
be in a superposition, but
then I've also heard other
explanations where one bit can
contain multiple dimensions for lack
of a better word, like
24 or more different, you
know, up, down left. Right.
And all these kinds of
things. Can you maybe explain
that? Is that a confusion
or an oversimplification? I heard
Justin Trudeau explain that once.
And it didn't quite sound
right. He did a pretty
good job when he was
interviewed on quantum, quantum computing.
I thought. Yeah. So indeed.
So, so let's go back
to this notion of a
quantum bit, right? Okay. Bit
is, is base, you know,
two level system, a binary
system. So when we say
cubit, we mean it's a,
it's a, a two level
system. The cubit has two
possible States, zero, zero, or
one. But again, those States
can be in super position.
So it's actually in the
state zero and one, but
it can take any combination,
any linear combination of zero
and one. So what this
means visually is think about
a sphere, right? Like a
ball. And imagine, you know,
the surface of this ball,
what it means is if
I take this ball at
say at the North pole
is the state zero at
the South pole is the
state one. Now my cubic
can take any point on
the surface of the sphere,
any point on the surface
of the ball, that cubit
state. So it could be
just in the zero state.
It could be just in
the one state, or it
can be any combination of
zero and one, meaning it
could take any point on
the sphere as its state.
So it's still a two
level system. If you want,
you know, higher level systems,
then you could go to,
you know, we talk about
ternary ternary would be a
three-level system. So acute TriNet,
a D level system, you
know, we're D as arbitrary
as a Q DIT, but
you know, most of the
time we think about just
cubits and mapping everything to
binary. So simplistically, if I
looked at a sphere, my
intuition might indicate that there
would be more degrees of
freedom than just those, that
between zero and one, I
might think about, you know,
X, Y, and Z, but
that's not necessarily the case,
is it okay? Well, no,
indeed you can think about
it in more degrees of
freedom. In fact, what is
it, a cubit it's, it's,
it's a comp it's hard
to describe some of these
mathematical principles on the, on
the podcast, but the idea
being that let's take some
value alpha and some value
beta, my cubic can take
the state alpha times the
state zero plus beta times
the state one and alpha
and beta are complex numbers.
So we are operating, we
didn't go into that on
this sphere, but the we're
actually operating in a complex
valued space. Okay. And that
is difficult. Not only to
explain in a, in three
dimensions, drawing a picture, it's
even more difficult when you
consider the fact that we're
on a podcast nearly through
time itself. So I appreciate
your patience. Yeah. So these
are the elements that we
use, but I would not
necessarily do all of this
work in C sharp. I
understand that there's a quantum
developer's kit that people can
download and I can program,
you know, the problems that
I want to with. I
can think about them outside
in C sharp, put the
quantum appropriate things into the
dev kit. And I can
simulate that even on my
laptop, if I want it
to Exactly, we're really thrilled
that we just released the
Microsoft quantum development kit. And
as part of this kit,
we've released a brand new
quantum focused programming language called
Q sharp. And the whole
idea here is that we
need a new language because
these principles that we've just
been walking through together, super
position interference, right? This notion
of cubits that take on
these different States, you know,
we need a language that
allows you to express these
things easily and at a
high enough level that you
can bring together, you know,
different aspects of quantum computing
and quantum mechanics together to
make a solution for, you
know, for an application that
you're interested in doing so.
So with the Microsoft quantum
development kit, we've put out
this, you know, this, this
high level, very accessible language,
Q sharp, which builds on
many of the ideas behind
languages like C sharp and
F sharp. So it should
look very familiar. It's embedded
in visual studio. So you
get syntax highlighting debugging, you
know, it, it feels very
familiar to the developer. And
then with that inside the
quantum development kit, we've also
released a whole set of
samples, tutorials libraries, right? So
you have all these libraries
at your fingertips that you
can pull together and call
on to actually build a
quantum application for, you know,
a quantum solution for, for
an application you're interested doing.
Plus we have tutorials. So
if you want to learn,
gosh, how does quantum teleportation
work? We have a whole
sample and it's written in
Q sharp. You know, the
language is well-documented. So you
can walk through and begin
to develop some intuition around
quantum computing. And the hope
is that by making quantum
computing accessible to a broad
audience, we're going to see
just amazing solutions come out
of the community in terms
of what, what will we
do with a quantum computer
and what will the key
killer applications be? One of
the things that I was
a little overwhelmed to hear
was that if I was
going to do local work,
30 cubits takes about 16
gigs of Ram 31 cubits
doubles the memory. Right. Right.
So, so what's great. I
should also mention in the
quantum development kit, and you
mentioned this earlier, is that
it not only comes with
the language and the samples,
but also a target simulator,
the simulator allows you to
simulate what would happen on,
as you just said, 30
cubits in roughly 16 gigs
of Ram. Now doubling again,
going back to the state
space, one more cubit requires
doubling the amount of memory.
And so locally, you're looking
at, you know, around 30
cubits for simulation, which again,
that's released as part of
the, the kit. But as
you go to say, 40,
you know, 41, 42 cubits,
you know, you're looking at
running on, we've released a
state of the art simulator
in Azure to allow you
to run on that scale
because after all, when you
get to just 230 250
cubits, you're looking at scaling
to more memory than there
are particles in the visible
universe. So when you think
about that 200 and, you
know, 250 cubit sounds so
small, but the, the amount
of information in 250 cubits
is more information that we
could store in particles in
the visible universe. But you're
talking about simulating a quantum
computer on a surface book.
When I then run my
code and move it from
local into Azure. Am I
simply simulating it in Azure
using their classical or standard
computers? Or is there in
fact, a quantum computer in
Azure, or is it really
that we're setting ourselves up
for some theoretical future where
there is a quantum computer
now, Right. It's really that
we're setting ourselves up to
take the code that you're
writing today. You can simulate
it today in Azure. So
you're simulating it within a
classical computing, conventional computing environment
using the Azure compute. And
then that same code when
we have a, you know,
scaled up quantum computer that
sitting in Azure, that same
code will then be able
to be deployed on that
compute in Azure, on the
quantum computer Platform. I see.
So this is so to
oversimplify things, cause that's what
I'm so good at. It's
like before GPU is I
might want to go and
render the movie toy story.
I could write all the
code for some theoretical GPU.
I simulate it locally and
it takes an hour for
every frame, fast forward, 20
years. And now we could
render toy story. And in
real time on an Nvidia
card that we have on
our PC. Yeah, exactly. Right.
I would say we're not
on the 20 year timeframe
though. You know, the idea
would be that this would
happen in more like a,
less than five year timeframe
to really scale to a
larger, larger quantum application. And
as we talked about in
the beginning of the podcast,
you know, already today, quantum
hardware exists and you're looking
at, you know, small numbers
of cubits, but the number
of cubits we have today
in the community is less
than what you can simulate.
So by being able to
run on a simulator saying
an Azure, that's giving you
access to the equivalent of,
you know, like 40 cubits.
So let me ask one
final question that I think
will be good way to
end the show for people
who are listening, who might
be going to work, and
maybe they're doing, you know,
text boxes over data and
not particularly amazing stuff from
a quantum computing perspective, but
they may have a problem
that their business, whatever business
they happen to be in
might need to answer. How
does, how does one know
and determine that they have
a question that is best
answered by quantum focused language?
Yeah, that's a great question.
And it's, it's one that
we continue to look into
every day. I think the,
you know, some of the
best problems to solve on
a quantum computer are those
where you're simulating a physical
system, a quantum mechanical system.
So say you're working on
thing, you know, thinking about
things in materials, material science.
I want to think about
an exotic property of a
material. I want to think
about catalysis. You know, how
do I make a chemical
reaction, more efficient? And if
that catalyst and that reaction
involves a heavy metal, then
a quantum computer is a
great candidate. Say, I want
to do machine learning. And,
and I I'm doing machine
learning, but I have a
way to maybe process data
down. When we're looking at
near term quantum computers, if
we have too much data,
that's going to be expensive
to do on a quantum
computer. So cases where you
maybe have streaming data or
data that you could process
down and then send to
the quantum computer, for example,
send a sub-routine to the
quantum computer to speed up
your machine learning algorithm. And
quantum computers are good, you
know, great at modeling the
physical world. In many cases,
they're great at doing, finding
quadratic square root speedups when
searching for solutions. So those
types of problems are things
to think about. Well, thank
you so much for taking
the time to put up
with my questions and for
educating all of us here
on the show. We do
appreciate you. My pleasure. Thank
you for having me on.
And I encourage the listeners
to go to microsoft.com forward
slash quantum and try out
the Microsoft quantum development kit.
Fantastic. I am downloading it
now and it integrates great
with visual studio 2017. Excellent.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.